All right, welcome back.
So in this lesson, we're going to learn some cool techniques for filtering data using the Streams API,
and we've got a couple of really great techniques that are quite easy to use for doing exactly that.
So let's jump in here.
So the first thing I think we want to do before we get really into it, though, is let's let's get
rid of this reversing that we're doing here.
I think it's just going to be a little easier to do some comparisons if we're not looking at the data
backward.
So we're getting rid of the reverse and let's just run this real quick.
OK, so coming back up here to the top, we've got all of our data, we've got all of our duplicated
Fred Flintstones mostly duplicated at least.
OK, cool.
So first, first little thing here we've got all these duplicate Fred Flintstones.
Let's see about getting rid of these duplicates.
Well, the Streams API has, as you might guess, a one line little method that we can add in here.
Method call that we can add into our pipeline to get rid of duplicates.
Now, of course, you've learned now that the definition of a duplicate tends to be predicated on the
way that the objects have been coded in terms of their equals and hash code methods.
Right.
Especially up until now, we've learned how to get rid of duplicates easily by storing all of the objects
in a set and effectively what ends up happening there is each object that goes into the set has a hash
code, and then the set has the ability to check that hash code and filter out any objects whose hash
code matches with objects that are already in there.
And then it also calls the equals method to really make sure, and we know that the set can filter out
duplicates according to both their hash code and equals implementations, right?
So there are similar things that we can do here without even having to put anything into a set, necessarily.
So what we can do is just reference this additional step in our pipeline now.
As always, there's always the question of where should we put this right?
So again, we know that this first bit on line thirty three is just text right strings.
And then here on Line thirty four, we're converting the text into implementations of an employee and
then converting those into employees.
And then we're sorting them and then we're converting them into and then we're printing them out and
converting them to numbers.
So I think we could filter the duplicates out anywhere after line thirty four.
I think all of the any of those lines anywhere after Line thirty four, but be for line thirty nine.
I think any of these steps would be OK.
So I don't know.
Let's maybe I'm inclined to throw it right after thirty five.
And the only reason I'm thinking of that is because it is after Line thirty five where we have the true
object and it's true in their truest form, which is as an actual employee and not as the I employee.
Now please understand, in actuality, it's the same object every time.
It's just what mask is in front of it, you know, so the data is all there, but sometimes you can't
see it.
If it's being masked by certain interfaces that don't expose like the get first name, forget last name,
it's the same objects, no matter what, though.
But I don't know.
Just I'm sort of inclined to to do this, this filtering, if you will, right after we get the the
true employees out.
So I'm going to put a blank space right here, and the method we're going to be calling is called distinct.
OK, so distinct.
And so what that wants to do is it wants to take all of the objects in our stream and make them distinct,
which means don't allow any duplicates.
Now if we hover over this, we can see the Java Dock for it and we see that basically what it's doing
is it returns a stream consisting of the distinct elements according to the equals method.
OK.
So in effect, what it's going to do is compare all of the objects in the stream to each other using
the equals method.
And if any object is already equal to another object that's in the stream, then it's going to just
throw that one out in effect.
OK, now there is one difference in the behavior of this distinct method, depending on whether or not
you're ordering the stream or not.
Because actually, if you're ordering the stream, then it says here that the element appearing first
in the encounter order is preserved.
Which is this telling us like when you're wondering if you've got a bunch of duplicates which duplicate
is going to be preserved in which ones will be thrown out, right?
So if you're ordering everything, then the first duplicate is the one that will be kept or preserved,
and then the subsequent duplicates will be will be thrown out.
So let's run that and see what we get.
All right.
So coming back up to the top, we now see that we don't have all of those Fred Flintstone duplicates
anymore, right?
So we can see that it did indeed get rid of the duplicates.
And again, those duplicates are defined in this case by, however, our equals method is implemented.
So if the equals method, in fact, let's just jump into the equals method real quick as a reminder.
There it is.
Here's our equals method, so our equals method is based on last name, first name and date of birth.
OK, so if those three fields are the same between any two or more objects, then you've got duplicates
there.
All right.
Jumping back.
So that's a nice, easy way that we can make sure that we don't have duplicates according to the equals
method.
OK, so now we've done this with distinct.
I want to show you real quick, though.
I'm going to get rid of that.
We actually could use a set also.
To do basically the same thing and to do that, what we will do, I'm putting another new line in the
same place where I had the distinct.
This time what I'm going to do is use a the collect method.
So there's a method called collect.
And if you imagine that the stream is this as a stream of individual employee objects kind of rolling
down a stream?
OK, and then imagine that the collect method is kind of like a net that someone's putting in that stream
and collecting all of these employees, right?
So you're collecting them all.
You can actually tell the collector to take all of the collected items from the stream and then put
them into something so we can tell it, for example, to put them all into a set, collect them into
a set or collect them into a list, collect them into a more generic collection or an UN modifiable
list.
OK?
So there are a lot of there are a number of little options there.
But if we choose this collectors that to set and I'm just going to select that right?
OK, so now these these employees are going to be collected into a set now notice.
As soon as I've done that, I get an error down here on the next line.
And the reason for that is because now the output that's coming out of this out of this collect method
here is a set, not a stream.
OK.
So if I want to continue on with all of these daisy chained method calls, which are all working as
a daisy chain because the output of each of them is a stream, then I need to get a stream out of the
set.
And remember, we learned that you can always get a stream from any implementation of a collection,
right or from any interface of a collection.
So currently, this call to collect is returning a set right, which is one of the interfaces derived
from a collection.
So I can get a stream off of that guy by just doing period stream.
And now the error goes away because now I can continue, right?
So again, using my analogy of a water stream with employees falling down the water stream, if you
will, and getting collected into a net by calling stream.
What I'm sort of doing here is I'm sort of taking all those employees that I collected in that net,
turning the net upside down and then letting them continue down a new stream.
OK.
That's basically a way that you might want to think of that.
And now the rest of that stream can continue on.
So let's just run that and see if we see any differences.
I don't think we're going to see much of a difference, if any.
All right, so, yeah, Fred Flintstone, well, my yes, so it's still unique and they're still in
order.
And that's because we're doing the sorting after we do the filtering, right?
That's why there's still an order here.
But isn't that kind of cool that we can do this now?
A lot of the times when I use the collect method here, I usually will use it at the end of my stream.
So just real quick, temporarily, let me come and tell all of this and I'll show you what I usually
would do.
So normally I'd be doing something like this, and I'm going to temporarily get rid of that too.
And then I'd just be capturing the output of the collect method with an option command V..
Right.
And so now I've got my whatever set of employees like.
So right now you just have a collection, a set right there and then you can go on and do other things
with that collection, if you like.
You can do whatever you want with it.
So that's how I normally would be using a collection.
I'm not saying that's this is wrong or right.
By the way, this is just oftentimes in in the various use cases where I'm using the Streams API if
I am using a the collect method.
It's kind of at the end of the stream, if you will.
And by the way, I mean, the collect method is a terminal operation, meaning it is usually intended
to be used at the end.
Right, which is why I mean, let me undo these changes.
Which is why in order to continue processing the rest of this, I had to create a new stream, right?
I had to create another stream off of this off of this set.
OK?
In order to let that proceed with the sorting and the mapping to integers and all of that business,
right?
So that's kind of cool.
So that's a second way that you could filter out the duplicates.
All right, now, there's other types of filtering that we can do, though, and this is where we get
into some really, really cool stuff.
So let me make up a scenario here.
Let's go look at our data.
OK, so first off, let's say that we want to filter out this guy right here because the, you know,
because it has the programmers and we already know that that's going to end up mapping to a a dummy
employee anyway.
So let's say we want to just filter that out.
Right?
So how could we do that?
And see, there it is, right there in a in a.
All right.
So there are multiple ways that we could do this.
Let's play with a couple.
Let's see.
So as usual, we may want to decide, OK, where do we want to even do any filtering of that sort?
And truly, we could do it at just about any step, right?
I think maybe again, the easier places to do this might be somewhere after we have converted the objects
to regular employees and not this interface version.
So somewhere after that, I think, might be a little bit easier, perhaps.
So to do this type of filtering?
The Streams API, in fact, has a method called.
Can you guess what it's called?
It's called filter.
All right.
So I'm going to put my cursor somewhere after Line thirty seven and type F and there's filter.
So the filter method takes what is called a predicate.
Now, a predicate is another functional interface that has one method, one abstract method defined
on it, and that is a method that returns a true or a false.
OK.
And the reason it returns a true or false is because usually it's implemented by a lambda expression
in order to decide what objects should or should not get filtered out of a stream.
OK, so let's just use it, and then you'll see what I'm talking about.
So filter.
All right, so this is going to be passed one object at a time out of the stream.
OK, so I can refer to those objects like EA and here's my arrow, and now I get to do anything I want
with EA as long as it reads, as long as it results in a boolean being returned, a true or a false.
OK.
And if it returns it true, then that object will be allowed to continue down the stream.
And if it returns a false, then that object will be taken out of the stream.
It will be filtered out of the stream.
OK.
So if I want to filter out?
The object that will be created from this line here with the programmers, there are probably a number
of ways that I could determine how to filter out an object that's created from this line.
One easy way that I can think of at the moment is the fact that I know that that line is going to result
in an object with a first name of in forward slash a.
So maybe I start off with just trying to filter based on that.
So let's see what that might look like.
So I'm going to do my lambda expression here, and I will have to refer to the object.
I'm going to use the variable e for employee and then I'll do my arrow here.
And then maybe I will say something like E Dot.
Let's see.
Get last name.
Dot equals in forward.
Slash a.
All right now.
This is actually the opposite of what I'm really wanting, though, because as I stated earlier, the
way that this filter method works is that my lambda here, if my lambda returns a true, then it allows
the object to to to continue through the stream.
And if it returns a false, then it gets filtered out.
So I actually want the opposite of this, right?
So how can I do that?
There are actually a few ways with this basic approach.
I could just put an exclamation right there, but that might not always be the most readable thing to
do because the exclamation mark means not.
So what I can do is I can actually just surround this entire lambda expression inside of the knot method
of the predicate interface so I can do an option command T and choose number one.
Just like that.
Now, if I go to the beginning of that, I can just reference the not method like so and now I will
need to import that as a static method.
There we go.
So that's a static method on the predicate class, and now I'm negating the way that this is going to
work.
So let's go ahead and just run it.
And what should happen now is we won't see this in a anymore.
Yet it's gone.
So that's kind of cool, right?
So let's let's try a few more filters, though.
How about let me select all of that and clear that out?
What if we wanted to get rid of all of the programmers, right?
So again, I will do a lambda here.
And let's say that we'll we'll just say something like where E!
Is an instance of programmer.
OK, now this would only show us the programmers, in fact, let's just run that real quick.
This will give us only the programmers.
There they are.
So those are just the programmers who are not duplicated, by the way, right now, if we want the opposite
of that, everybody who is not a programmer.
Then again, I can just select that whole entire lambda to an option command T to surround that.
Go to the beginning of here and then do a not.
Let's run that, and this will be everyone who isn't a programmer.
All right.
So it's a little shorter list.
There's the nay again.
Now what if I want both?
What if I want to get rid of the NRA and I want everybody who's not a programmer?
Can you think of how to do that?
Take a moment.
OK.
Did you get it?
It's pretty easy.
All you need to do is just add another filter.
Isn't this great how you can just keep chaining, chaining these method calls together like this, right?
So not.
And then.
Right.
So you could do that.
Here we go, so now we're also now we've also filtered out the the the MNAs, right?
Another way you could do that is to tack it on here, right?
You could say something like where is instance of programmer and, uh, e dot get last name equals in
a right so you could do something like that?
I'm not going to run that, but you get to get the idea.
So that's another way, though.
Be careful with this because you don't like you.
You don't want to put too much logic all on one line like this that starts to get a little harder to
read.
Right?
Probably better to just have an additional filter.
That way, you can just read each little predicate for itself, essentially, right?
All right.
Let's do maybe a slightly more advanced, a little tiny, bit more advanced filter here.
Let's say that we only want to see the employees who have a salary greater than five thousand dollars.
Right?
That should be pretty easy to do.
So let's see.
We'll we'll get rid of this existing predicate.
We'll say E.
So we're e we're e that get salary greater than five thousand.
It's as easy as that.
There they are.
And then you could even do something you could add another one in there.
And where?
The salary is less than, I don't know, ten thousand.
Look at that.
I mean, it just, you know, it's so easy, right to do this now.
One of the other things that you should know about the Streams API is that it is highly optimized.
So when we implement functionality using the Streams API, probably more often than not, logic that's
implemented in this way is actually running faster than if you wrote out the code in the more traditional
way.
And the reason for that has to do with all of the opportunities for the for the for Java to optimize
how it is actually implementing the logic underneath the hood.
OK, so it's it gets a much better opportunity to optimize the code before it executes.
So using the streams API has a lot of benefits.
It tends to be, in many cases, much more readable, easier to maintain and actually runs faster.
And I'll mention this now, and we may learn a little bit more about it later.
But it also opens up our code for the ability to take full advantage of multiple processing cores on
the computer so that we can actually process data in parallel streams simultaneously.
And we don't have to be experts at multiprocessing and what it takes to do all of that.
The Streams API makes it extremely easy for us to do without much understanding.
So there's just a ton of power in in using the Streams API in a lot of cases, especially cases like
this, where you've got a collection of a lot of data that you need to sift through and manipulate in
various ways, convert into some other form or or filter out, or do a lot of combinations of those
sorts of things.
All right.
So I think that's going to wrap up this lesson and I will see you in the next one.